??????
To Leon Werth
I ask the indulgence of the children who may read this book for dedicating it to a grown-up. I have a serious reason: he is the best friend I have in the world. I have another reason: this grown-up understands everything
even books about children. I have a third reason: he lives in France where he is hungry and cold. He needs cheering up. If all these reasons are not enough
I will dedicate the book to the child from whom this grown-up grew. All grown-ups were once children-- although few of them remember it. And so I correct my dedication:
To Leon Werth
when he was a little boy
[ Chapter 1 ]
- we are introduced to the narrator
a pilot
and his ideas about grown-ups
Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book
called True Stories from Nature
about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing.
In the book it said: "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole
without chewing it. After that they are not able to move
and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion."
I pondered deeply
then
over the adventures of the jungle. And after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing Number One. It looked like this:
I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups
and asked them whether the drawing frightened them.
But they answered: "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?"
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it
I made another drawing: I drew the inside of the boa constrictor
so that the grown-ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My Drawing Number Two looked like this:
The grown-ups' response
this time
was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors
whether from the inside or the outside
and devote myself instead to geography
history
arithmetic and grammar. That is why
at the age of six
I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter. I had been disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves
and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
So then I chose another profession
and learned to pilot airplanes. I have flown a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona. If one gets lost in the night
such knowledge is valuable.
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived a great deal among grown-ups. I have seen them intimately
close at hand. And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them.
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted
I tried the experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One
which I have always kept. I would try to find out
so
if this was a person of true understanding. But
whoever it was
he
or she
would always say:
That is a hat.
Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors
or primeval forests
or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I would talk to him about bridge
and golf
and politics
and neckties. And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man.
[ Chapter 2 ]
- the narrator crashes in the desert and makes the acquaintance of the little prince
So I lived my life alone
without anyone that I could really talk to
until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara
six years ago. Something was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers
I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was a question of life or death for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week.
The first night
then
I went to sleep on the sand
a thousand miles from any human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement
at sunrise
when I was awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
If you please-- draw me a sheep!
What!
Draw me a sheep!
I jumped to my feet
completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I looked carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person
who stood there examining me with great seriousness. Here you may see the best potrait that
later
I was able to make of him. But my drawing is certainly very much less charming than its model.
That
however
is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my painter's career when I was six years old
and I never learned to draw anything
except boas from the outside and boas from the inside.
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment. Remember
I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands
nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert
a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak
I said to him:
But-- what are you doing here?
And in answer he repeated
very slowly
as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence: "If you please-- draw me a sheep..."
When a mystery is too overpowering
one dare not disobey. Absurd as it might seem to me
a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death
I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain-pen. But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated on geography
history
arithmetic
and grammar
and I told the little chap (a little crossly
too) that I did not know how to draw. He answered me:
That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep...
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with
No
no
no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature
and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where I live
everything is very small. What I need is a sheep. Draw me a sheep.
So then I made a drawing.
He looked at it carefully
then he said:
No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another.
So I made another drawing.
My friend smiled gently and indulgenty.
You see yourself
he said
that this is not a sheep. This is a ram. It has horns.
So then I did my drawing over once more.
But it was rejected too
just like the others.
This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time.
By this time my patience was exhausted
because I was in a hurry to start taking my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing.
And I threw out an explanation with it.
This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside.
I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge:
That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass?
Why?
Because where I live everything is very small...
There will surely be enough grass for him
I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you."
He bent his head over the drawing:
Not so small that-- Look! He has gone to sleep...
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the little prince.
[ Chapter 3 ]
- the narrator learns more about from where the little prince came
It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince
who asked me so many questions
never seemed to hear the ones I asked him. It was from words dropped by chance that
little by little
everything was revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane
for instance (I shall not draw my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me)
he asked me:
What is that object?
That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane.
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly.
He cried out
then:
What! You dropped down from the sky?
Yes
I answered
modestly.
Oh! That is funny!
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter
which irritated me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
So you
too
come from the sky! Which is your planet?
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence; and I demanded
abruptly:
Do you come from another planet?
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently
without taking his eyes from my plane:
It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away...
And he sank into a reverie
which lasted a long time. Then
taking my sheep out of his pocket
he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half-confidence about the "other planets." I made a great effort
therefore
to find out more on this subject.
My little man
where do you come from? What is this 'where I live
' of which you speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?
After a reflective silence he answered:
The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at night he can use it as his house.
That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string
too
so that you can tie him during the day
and a post to tie him to.
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
Tie him! What a queer idea!
But if you don't tie him
I said
he will wander off somewhere
and get lost.
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
But where do you think he would go?
Anywhere. Straight ahead of him.
Then the little prince said
earnestly:
That doesn't matter. Where I live
everything is so small!
And
with perhaps a hint of sadness
he added:
Straight ahead of him
nobody can go very far...
[ Chapter 4 ]
- the narrator speculates as to which asteroid from which the little prince came
I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house!
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in addition to the great planets-- such as the Earth
Jupiter
Mars
Venus-- to which we have given names
there are also hundreds of others
some of which are so small that one has a hard time seeing them through the telescope. When an astronomer discovers one of these he does not give it a name
but only a number. He might call it
for example
Asteroid 325.
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little prince came is the asteroid known as B-612.
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer
in 1909.
On making his discovery
the astronomer had presented it to the International Astronomical Congress
in a great demonstration. But he was in Turkish costume
and so nobody would believe what he said.
Grown-ups are like that...
Fortunately
however
for the reputation of Asteroid B-612
a Turkish dictator made a law that his subjects
under pain of death
should change to European costume. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his demonstration all over again
dressed with impressive style and elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report.
If I have told you these details about the asteroid
and made a note of its number for you
it is on account of the grown-ups and their ways. When you tell them that you have made a new friend
they never ask you any questions about essential matters. They never say to you
What does his voice sound like? What games does he love best? Does he collect butterflies?
Instead
they demand: "How old is he? How many brothers has he? How much does he weigh? How much money does his father make?" Only from these figures do they think they have learned anything about him.
If you were to say to the grown-ups: "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick
with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof
they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them:
I saw a house that cost $20
000." Then they would exclaim: "Oh
what a pretty house that is!"
Just so
you might say to them: "The proof that the little prince existed is that he was charming
that he laughed
and that he was looking for a sheep. If anybody wants a sheep
that is a proof that he exists." And what good would it do to tell them that? They would shrug their shoulders
and treat you like a child. But if you said to them: "The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612
then they would be convinced
and leave you in peace from their questions.
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always show great forbearance toward grown-up people.
But certainly
for us who understand life
figures are a matter of indifference. I should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy-tales. I should have like to say:
Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself
and who had need of a sheep..."
To those who understand life
that would have given a much greater air of truth to my story.
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed since my friend went away from me
with his sheep. If I try to describe him here
it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not every one has had a friend. And if I forget him
I may become like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything but figures...
It is for that purpose
again
that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age
when I have never made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside
since I was six. I shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life as possible. But I am not at all sure of success. One drawing goes along all right
and another has no resemblance to its subject. I make some errors
too
in the littl e prince's height: in one place he is too tall and in another too short. And I feel some doubts about the color of his costume. So I fumble along as best I can
now good
now bad
and I hope generally fair-to-middling.
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes
also. But that is something that will not be my fault. My friend never explained anything to me. He thought
perhaps
that I was like himself. But I
alas
do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes. Perhaps I am a little like the grown-ups. I have had to grow old.
[ Chapter 5 ]
- we are warned as to the dangers of the baobabs
As each day passed I would learn
in our talk
something about the little prince's planet
his departure from it
his journey. The information would come very slowly
as it might chance to fall from his thoughts. It was in this way that I heard
on the third day
about the catastrophe of the baobabs.
This time
once more
I had the sheep to thank for it. For the little prince asked me abruptly-- as if seized by a grave doubt-- "It is true
isn't it
that sheep eat little bushes?"
Yes
that is true.
Ah! I am glad!
I did not understand why it was so important that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added:
Then it follows that they also eat baobabs?
I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs were not little bushes
but
on the contrary
trees as big as castles; and that even if he took a whole herd of elephants away with him
the herd would not eat up one single baobab.
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh.
We would have to put them one on top of the other
he said.
But he made a wise comment:
Before they grow so big
the baobabs start out by being little.
That is strictly correct
I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs?"
He answered me at once
Oh
come
come!
as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident. And I was obliged to make a great mental effort to solve this problem
without any assistance.
Indeed
as I learned
there were on the planet where the little prince lived-- as on all planets-- good plants and bad plants. In consequence
there were good seeds from good plants
and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible. They sleep deep in the heart of the earth's darkness
until some one among them is seized with the desire to awaken. Then this little seed will stretch itself and begin-- timidly at first-- to push a charming little sprig inoffensively upward toward the sun. If it is only a sprout of radish or the sprig of a rose-bush
one would let it grow wherever it might wish. But when it is a bad plant
one must destroy it as soon as possible
the very first instant that one recognizes it.
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet that was the home of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil of that planet was infested with them. A baobab is something you will never
never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late. It spreads over the entire planet. It bores clear through it with its roots. And if the planet is too small
and the baobabs are too many
they split it in pieces...
It is a question of discipline
the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning
then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet
just so
with the greatest care. You must see to it that you pull up regularly all the baobabs
at the very first moment when they can be distinguished from the rosebushes which they resemble so closely in their earliest youth. It is very tedious work
the little prince added
but very easy."
And one day he said to me: "You ought to make a beautiful drawing
so that the children where you live can see exactly how all this is. That would be very useful to them if they were to travel some day. Sometimes
he added
there is no harm in putting off a piece of work until another day. But when it is a matter of baobabs
that always means a catastrophe. I knew a planet that was inhabited by a lazy man. He neglected three little bushes..."
So
as the little prince described it to me
I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like to take the tone of a moralist. But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood
and such considerable risks would be run by anyone who might get lost on an asteroid
that for once I am breaking through my reserve. "Children
I say plainly
watch out for the baobabs!"
My friends
like myself
have been skirting this danger for a long time
without ever knowing it; and so it is for them that I have worked so hard over this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is worth all the trouble it has cost me.
Perhaps you will ask me
Why are there no other drawing in this book as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs?
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the others I have not been successful. When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity.
[ Chapter 6 ]
- the little prince and the narrator talk about sunsets
Oh
little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your sad little life... For a long time you had found your only entertainment in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned that new detail on the morning of the fourth day
w hen you said to me:
I am very fond of sunsets. Come
let us go look at a sunset now.
But we must wait
I said.
Wait? For what?
For the sunset. We must wait until it is time.
At first you seemed to be very much surprised. And then you laughed to yourself. You said to me:
I am always thinking that I am at home!
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in the United States the sun is setting over France.
If you could fly to France in one minute
you could go straight into the sunset
right from noon. Unfortunately
France is too far away for that. But on your tiny planet
my little prince
all you need do is move your chair a few steps. You can see the day end and the twilight falling whenever you like...
One day
you said to me
I saw the sunset forty-four times!
And a little later you added:
You know-- one loves the sunset
when one is so sad...
Were you so sad
then?
I asked
on the day of the forty-four sunsets?
But the little prince made no reply.
[ Chapter 7 ]
- the narrator learns about the secret of the little prince's life
On the fifth day-- again
as always
it was thanks to the sheep-- the secret of the little prince's life was revealed to me. Abruptly
without anything to lead up to it
and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem
he demanded:
A sheep-- if it eats little bushes
does it eat flowers
too?
A sheep
I answered
eats anything it finds in its reach.
Even flowers that have thorns?
Yes
even flowers that have thorns.
Then the thorns-- what use are they?
I did not know. At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt that had got stuck in my engine. I was very much worried
for it was becoming clear to me that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious. And I had so little drinking-water left that I had to fear for the worst.
The thorns-- what use are they?
The little prince never let go of a question
once he had asked it. As for me
I was upset over that bolt. And I answered with the first thing that came into my head:
The thorns are of no use at all. Flowers have thorns just for spite!
Oh!
There was a moment of complete silence. Then the little prince flashed back at me
with a kind of resentfulness:
I don't believe you! Flowers are weak creatures. They are na飗e. They reassure themselves as best they can. They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons...
I did not answer. At that instant I was saying to myself: "If this bolt still won't turn
I am going to knock it out with the hammer." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts.
And you actually believe that the flowers--
Oh
no!
I cried. "No
no no! I don't believe anything. I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see-- I am very busy with matters of consequence!"
He stared at me
thunderstruck.
Matters of consequence!
He looked at me there
with my hammer in my hand
my fingers black with engine-grease
bending down over an object which seemed to him extremely ugly...
You talk just like the grown-ups!
That made me a little ashamed. But he went on
relentlessly:
You mix everything up together... You confuse everything...
He was really very angry. He tossed his golden curls in the breeze.
I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced gentleman. He has never smelled a flower. He has never looked at a star. He has never loved any one. He has never done anything in his life but add up figures. And all day he says over and over
just like you: 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride. But he is not a man-- he is a mushroom!
A what?
A mushroom!
The little prince was now white with rage.
The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years. For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same. And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them? Is the warfare between the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums? And if I know-- I
myself-- one flower which is unique in the world
which grows nowhere but on my planet
but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning
without even noticing what he is doing-- Oh! You think that is not important!
His face turned from white to red as he continued:
If some one loves a flower
of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars
it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars. He can say to himself
'Somewhere
my flower is there...' But if the sheep eats the flower
in one moment all his stars will be darkened... And you think that is not important!
He could not say anything more. His words were choked by sobbing.
The night had fallen. I had let my tools drop from my hands. Of what moment now was my hammer
my bolt
or thirst
or death? On one star
one planet
my planet
the Earth
there was a little prince to be comforted. I took him in my arms
and rocked him. I said to him:
The flower that you love is not in danger. I will draw you a muzzle for your sheep. I will draw you a railing to put around your flower. I will--
I did not know what to say to him. I felt awkward and blundering. I did not know how I could reach him
where I could overtake him and go on hand in hand with him once more.
It is such a secret place
the land of tears.
[ Chapter 8 ]
- the rose arrives at the little prince's planet
I soon learned to know this flower better. On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple. They had only one ring of petals; they took up no room at all; they were a trouble to nobody. One morning they would appear in the grass
and by night they would have faded peacefully away. But one day
from a seed blown from no one knew where
a new flower had come up; and the little prince had watched very closely over this small sprout which was not like any other small sprouts on his planet. It might
you see
have been a new kind of baobab.
The shrub soon stopped growing
and began to get ready to produce a flower. The little prince
who was present at the first appearance of a huge bud
felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must emerge from it. But the flower was not satisfied to complete the preparations for her beauty in the shelter of her green chamber. She chose her colours with the greatest care. She adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go out into the world all rumpled
like the field poppies. It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear. Oh
yes! She was a coquettish creature! And her mysterious adornment lasted for days and days.
Then one morning
exactly at sunrise
she suddenly showed herself.
And
after working with all this painstaking precision
she yawned and said:
Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are still all disarranged...
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration:
Oh! How beautiful you are!
Am I not?
the flower responded
sweetly. "And I was born at the same moment as the sun..."
The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too modest-- but how moving-- and exciting-- she was!
I think it is time for breakfast
she added an instant later. "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs--"
And the little prince
completely abashed
went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water. So
he tended the flower.
So
too
she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity-- which was
if the truth be known
a little difficult to deal with. One day
for instance
when she was speaking of her four thorns
she said to the little prince:
Let the tigers come with their claws!
There are no tigers on my planet
the little prince objected. "And
anyway
tigers do not eat weeds."
I am not a weed
the flower replied
sweetly.
Please excuse me...
I am not at all afraid of tigers
she went on
but I have a horror of drafts. I suppose you wouldn't have a screen for me?
A horror of drafts-- that is bad luck
for a plant
remarked the little prince
and added to himself
This flower is a very complex creature...
At night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold where you live. In the place I came from--
But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a seed. She could not have known anything of any other worlds. Embarassed over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a na飗e untruth
she coughed two or three times
in order to put the little prince in the wrong.
The screen?
I was just going to look for it when you spoke to me...
Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from remorse just the same.
So the little prince
in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love
had soon come to doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were without importance
and it made him very unhappy.
I ought not to have listened to her
he confided to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace. This tale of claws
which disturbed me so much
should only have filled my heart with tenderness and pity."
And he continued his confidences:
The fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me. I ought never to have run away from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection that lay behind her poor little strategems. Flowers are so inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to love her...
[ Chapter 9 ]
- the little prince leaves his planet
I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds. On the morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active volcanoes. He possessed two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning. He also had one volcano that was extinct. But
as he said
One never knows!
So he cleaned out the extinct volcano
too. If they are well cleaned out
volcanoes burn slowly and steadily
without any eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney.
On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes. That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us.
The little prince also pulled up
with a certain sense of dejection
the last little shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want to return. But on this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him. And when he watered the flower for the last time
and prepared to place her under the shelter of her glass globe
he realised that he was very close to tears.
Goodbye
he said to the flower.
But she made no answer.
Goodbye
he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold.
I have been silly
she said to him
at last. "I ask your forgiveness. Try to be happy..."
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all bewildered
the glass globe held arrested in mid-air. He did not understand this quiet sweetness.
Of course I love you
the flower said to him. "It is my fault that you have not known it all the while. That is of no importance. But you-- you have been just as foolish as I. Try to be happy... let the glass globe be. I don't want it any more."
But the wind--
My cold is not so bad as all that... the cool night air will do me good. I am a flower.
But the animals--
Well
I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful. And if not the butterflies-- and the caterpillars-- who will call upon me? You will be far away... as for the large animals-- I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have my claws.
And
na飗ely
she showed her four thorns. Then she added:
Don't linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!
For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower...
[ Chapter 10 ]
- the little prince visits the king
He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325
326
327
328
329
and 330. He began
therefore
by visiting them
in order to add to his knowledge.
The first of them was inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and ermine
he was seated upon a throne which was at the same time both simple and majestic.
Ah! Here is a subject
exclaimed the king
when he saw the little prince coming.
And the little prince asked himself:
How could he recognize me when he had never seen me before?
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them
all men are subjects.
Approach
so that I may see you better
said the king
who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody.
The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the entire planet was crammed and obstructed by the king's magnificent ermine robe. So he remained standing upright
and
since he was tired
he yawned.
It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king
the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so."
I can't help it. I can't stop myself
replied the little prince
thoroughly embarrassed. "I have come on a long journey
and I have had no sleep..."
Ah
then
the king said. "I order you to yawn. It is years since I have seen anyone yawning. Yawns
to me
are objects of curiosity. Come
now! Yawn again! It is an order."
That frightens me... I cannot
any more...
murmured the little prince
now completely abashed.
Hum! Hum!
replied the king. "Then I-- I order you sometimes to yawn and sometimes to--"
He sputtered a little
and seemed vexed.
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his authority should be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute monarch. But
because he was a very good man
he made his orders reasonable.
If I ordered a general
he would say
by way of example
if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird
and if the general did not obey me
that would not be the fault of the general. It would be my fault.
May I sit down?
came now a timid inquiry from the little prince.
I order you to do so
the king answered him
and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle.
But the little prince was wondering... The planet was tiny. Over what could this king really rule?
Sire
he said to him
I beg that you will excuse my asking you a question--
I order you to ask me a question
the king hastened to assure him.
Sire-- over what do you rule?
Over everything
said the king
with magnificent simplicity.
Over everything?
The king made a gesture
which took in his planet
the other planets
and all the stars.
Over all that?
asked the little prince.
Over all that
the king answered.
For his rule was not only absolute: it was also universal.
And the stars obey you?
Certainly they do
the king said. "They obey instantly. I do not permit insubordination."
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had been master of such complete authority
he would have been able to watch the sunset
not forty-four times in one day
but seventy-two
or even a hundred
or even two hundred times
with out ever having to move his chair. And because he felt a bit sad as he remembered his little planet which he had forsaken
he plucked up his courage to ask the king a favor:
I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness... Order the sun to set...
If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly
or to write a tragic drama
or to change himself into a sea bird
and if the general did not carry out the order that he had received
which one of us would be in the wrong?
the king demanded. "The general
or myself?"
You
said the little prince firmly.
Exactly. One much require from each one the duty which each one can perform
the king went on. "Accepted authority rests first of all on reason. If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea
they would rise up in revolution. I have the right to require obedience because my orders are reasonable."
Then my sunset?
the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it.
You shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But
according to my science of government
I shall wait until conditions are favorable.
When will that be?
inquired the little prince.
Hum! Hum!
replied the king; and before saying anything else he consulted a bulky almanac. "Hum! Hum! That will be about-- about-- that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how well I am obeyed."
The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then
too
he was already beginning to be a little bored.
I have nothing more to do here
he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again."
Do not go
said the king
who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister!"
Minister of what?
Minster of-- of Justice!
But there is nobody here to judge!
We do not know that
the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a carriage. And it tires me to walk."
Oh
but I have looked already!
said the little prince
turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet. On that side
as on this
there was nobody at all...
Then you shall judge yourself
the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all. It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others. If you succeed in judging yourself rightly
then you are indeed a man of true wisdom."
Yes
said the little prince
but I can judge myself anywhere. I do not need to live on this planet.
Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe that somewhere on my planet there is an old rat. I hear him at night. You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death. Thus his life will depend on your justice. But you will pardon him on each occasion; for he must be treated thriftily. He is the only one we have."
I
replied the little prince
do not like to condemn anyone to death. And now I think I will go on my way.
No
said the king.
But the little prince
having now completed his preparations for departure
had no wish to grieve the old monarch.
If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed
he said
he should be able to give me a reasonable order. He should be able
for example
to order me to be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that conditions are favorable...
As the king made no answer
the little prince hesitated a moment. Then
with a sigh
he took his leave.
I made you my Ambassador
the king called out
hastily.
He had a magnificent air of authority.
The grown-ups are very strange
the little prince said to himself
as he continued on his journey.
[ Chapter 11 ]
- the little prince visits the conceited man
The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man.
Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!
he exclaimed from afar
when he first saw the little prince coming.
For
to conceited men
all other men are admirers.
Good morning
said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing."
It is a hat for salutes
the conceited man replied. "It is to raise in salute when people acclaim me. Unfortunately
nobody at all ever passes this way."
Yes?
said the little prince
who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about.
Clap your hands
one against the other
the conceited man now directed him.
The little prince clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute.
This is more entertaining than the visit to the king
the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands
one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony.
And what should one do to make the hat come down?
he asked.
But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people never hear anything but praise.
Do you really admire me very much?
he demanded of the little prince.
What does that mean-- 'admire'?
To admire mean that you regard me as the handsomest
the best-dressed
the richest
and the most intelligent man on this planet.
But you are the only man on your planet!
Do me this kindness. Admire me just the same.
I admire you
said the little prince
shrugging his shoulders slightly
but what is there in that to interest you so much?
And the little prince went away.
The grown-ups are certainly very odd
he said to himself
as he continued on his journey.
[ Chapter 12 ]
- the little prince visits the tippler
The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. This was a very short visit
but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection.
What are you doing there?
he said to the tippler
whom he found settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles and also a collection of full bottles.
I am drinking
replied the tippler
with a lugubrious air.
Why are you drinking?
demanded the little prince.
So that I may forget
replied the tippler.
Forget what?
inquired the little prince
who already was sorry for him.
Forget that I am ashamed
the tippler confessed
hanging his head.
Ashamed of what?
insisted the little prince
who wanted to help him.
Ashamed of drinking!
The tippler brought his speech to an end
and shut himself up in an impregnable silence.
And the little prince went away
puzzled.
The grown-ups are certainly very
very odd
he said to himself
as he continued on his journey.
[ Chapter 13 ]
- the little prince visits the businessman
The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. This man was so much occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little prince's arrival.
Good morning
the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out."
Three and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three make fifteen. Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. I haven't time to light it again. Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. Phew! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million
six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand
seven-hundred-thirty-one.
Five hundred million what?
asked the little prince.
Eh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and-one million-- I can't stop... I have so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I don't amuse myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven...
Five-hundred-and-one million what?
repeated the little prince
who never in his life had let go of a question once he had asked it.
The businessman raised his head.
During the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet
I have been disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years ago
when some giddy goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the most frightful noise that resounded all over the place
and I made four mistakes in my addition. The second time
eleven years ago
I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism. I don't get enough exercise. I have no time for loafing. The third time-- well
this is it! I was saying
then
five -hundred-and-one millions--
Millions of what?
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace until he answered this question.
Millions of those little objects
he said
which one sometimes sees in the sky.
Flies?
Oh
no. Little glittering objects.
Bees?
Oh
no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle dreaming. As for me
I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life.
Ah! You mean the stars?
Yes
that's it. The stars.
And what do you do with five-hundred millions of stars?
Five-hundred-and-one million
six-hundred-twenty-two thousand
seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate.
And what do you do with these stars?
What do I do with them?
Yes.
Nothing. I own them.
You own the stars?
Yes.
But I have already seen a king who--
Kings do not own
they reign over. It is a very different matter.
And what good does it do you to own the stars?
It does me the good of making me rich.
And what good does it do you to be rich?
It makes it possible for me to buy more stars
if any are ever discovered.
This man
the little prince said to himself
reasons a little like my poor tippler...
Nevertheless
he still had some more questions.
How is it possible for one to own the stars?
To whom do they belong?
the businessman retorted
peevishly.
I don't know. To nobody.
Then they belong to me
because I was the first person to think of it.
Is that all that is necessary?
Certainly. When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody
it is yours. When you discover an island that belongs to nobody
it is yours. When you get an idea before any one else
you take out a patent on it: it is yours. So with me: I own the stars
because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them.
Yes
that is true
said the little prince. "And what do you do with them?"
I administer them
replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them. It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence."
The little prince was still not satisfied.
If I owned a silk scarf
he said
I could put it around my neck and take it away with me. If I owned a flower
I could pluck that flower and take it away with me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven...
No. But I can put them in the bank.
Whatever does that mean?
That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. And then I put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key.
And that is all?
That is enough
said the businessman.
It is entertaining
thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic. But it is of no great consequence."
On matters of consequence
the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups.
I myself own a flower
he continued his conversation with the businessman
which I water every day. I own three volcanoes
which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows). It is of some use to my volcanoes
and it is of some use to my flower
that I own them. But you are of no use to the stars...
The businessman opened his mouth
but he found nothing to say in answer. And the little prince went away.
The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary
he said simply
talking to himself as he continued on his journey.
?XIX
小王子爬上一座高山。过去他所见过的山就是那三座只有他膝盖那么高的火
山，并且他把那座熄灭了的火山就当作凳子。小王子自言自语地说道：“从这么
高的山上，我一眼可以看到整个星球，以及所有的人。”可是，他所看到的只是
一些非常锋利的悬崖峭壁。
“你好。”小王子试探地问道。
“你好…你好…你好…”回音在回答道。
“你们是什么人？”小王子问。
“你们是什么人…你们是什么人…你们是什么人…”回音又回答道。
“请你们做我的朋友吧，我很孤独。”他说。
“我很孤独…我很孤独…我很孤独…”回音又回答着。
小王子想道：“这颗行星真奇怪！它上面全是干巴巴的，而且又尖利又咸涩，
人们一点想象力都没有。他们只是重复别人对他们说的话…在我的家乡，我有一
朵花。她总是自己先说话…
XX
在沙漠、岩石、雪地上行走了很长的时间以后，小王子终于发现了一条大路。
所有的大路都是通往人住的地方的。
“你们好。”小王子说。
这是一个玫瑰盛开的花园。
“你好。”玫瑰花说道。
小王子瞅着这些花，它们全都和他的那朵花一样。
“你们是什么花？”小王子惊奇地问。
“我们是玫瑰花。”花儿们说道。
“啊！”小王子说…。
他感到自己非常不幸。他的那朵花曾对他说她是整个宇宙中独一无二的一种
花。可是，仅在这一座花园里就有五千朵完全一样的这种花朵！
小王子自言自语地说：“如果她看到这些，她是一定会很恼火…她会咳嗽得
更厉害，并且为避免让人耻笑，她会佯装死去。那么，我还得装着去护理她，因
为如果不这样的话，她为了使我难堪，她可能会真的死去…”
接着他又说道：“我还以为我有一朵独一无二的花呢，我有的仅是一朵普通
的花。这朵花，再加上三座只有我膝盖那么高的火山，而且其中一座还可能是永
远熄灭了的，这一切不会使我成为一个了不起的王子…”于是，他躺在草丛中哭
泣起来。
XXI
就在这当儿，跑来了一只狐狸。
“你好。”狐狸说。
“你好。”小王子很有礼貌地回答道。他转过身来，但什么也没有看到。
“我在这儿，在苹果树下。”那声音说。
“你是谁？”小王子说，“你很漂亮。”
“我是一只狐狸。”狐狸说。
“来和我一起玩吧，”小王子建议道，“我很苦恼…”
“我不能和你一起玩，”狐狸说，“我还没有被驯服呢。”
“啊！真对不起。”小王子说。
思索了一会儿，他又说道：“什么叫‘驯服’呀？”
“你不是此地人。”狐狸说，“你来寻找什么？”
“我来找人。”小王子说，“什么叫‘驯服’呢？”
“人，”狐狸说，“他们有枪，他们还打猎，这真碍事！他们唯一的可取之
处就是他们也养鸡，你是来寻找鸡的吗？”
“不，”小王子说，“我是来找朋友的。什么叫‘驯服’呢？”
“这是已经早就被人遗忘了的事情，”狐狸说，“它的意思就是‘建立联系’。”
“建立联系？”
“一点不错，”狐狸说。“对我来说，你还只是一个小男孩，就像其他千万
个小男孩一样。我不需要你。你也同样用不着我。对你来说，我也不过是一只狐
狸，和其他千万只狐狸一样。但是，如果你驯服了我，我们就互相不可缺少了。
对我来说，你就是世界上唯一的了；我对你来说，也是世界上唯一的了。”
“我有点明白了。”小王子说，“有一朵花…，我想，她把我驯服了…”
“这是可能的。”狐狸说，“世界上什么样的事都可能看到…”
啊，这不是在地球上的事。”小王子说。
狐狸感到十分蹊跷。
“在另一个星球上？”
“是的。”
“在那个星球上，有猎人吗？”
“没有。”
“这很有意思。那么，有鸡吗？”
“没有。”
“没有十全十美的。”狐狸叹息地说道。
可是，狐狸又把话题拉回来：
“我的生活很单调。我捕捉鸡，而人又捕捉我。所有的鸡全都一样，所有的
人也全都一样。因此，我感到有些厌烦了。但是，如果你要是驯服了我，我的生
活就一定会是欢快的。我会辨认出一种与众不同的脚步声。其他的脚步声会使我
躲到地下去，而你的脚步声就会象音乐一样让我从洞里走出来。再说，你看！你
看到那边的麦田没有？我不吃面包，麦子对我来说，一点用也没有。我对麦田无
动于衷。而这，真使人扫兴。但是，你有着金黄色的头发。那么，一旦你驯服了
我，这就会十分美妙。麦子，是金黄色的，它就会使我想起你。而且，我甚至会
喜欢那风吹麦浪的声音…”
狐狸沉默不语，久久地看着小王子。
“请你驯服我吧！”他说。
“我是很愿意的。”小王子回答道，“可我的时间不多了。我还要去寻找朋
友，还有许多事物要了解。”
“只有被驯服了的事物，才会被了解。”狐狸说，“人不会再有时间去了解
任何东西的。他们总是到商人那里去购买现成的东西。因为世界上还没有购买朋
友的商店，所以人也就没有朋友。如果你想要一个朋友，那就驯服我吧！”
“那么应当做些什么呢？”小王子说。
“应当非常耐心。”狐狸回答道，“开始你就这样坐在草丛中，坐得离我稍
微远些。我用眼角瞅着你，你什么也不要说。话语是误会的根源。但是，每天，
你坐得靠我更近些…
第二天，小王子又来了。
“最好还是在原来的那个时间来。”狐狸说道，“比如说，你下午四点钟来，
那么从三点钟起，我就开始感到幸福。时间越临近，我就越感到幸福。到了四点
钟的时候，我就会坐立不安；我就会发现幸福的代价。但是，如果你随便什么时
候来，我就不知道在什么时候该准备好我的心情…应当有一定的仪式。”
“仪式是什么？”小王子问道。
“这也是一种早已被人忘却了的事。”狐狸说，“它就是使某一天与其他日
子不同，使某一时刻与其他时刻不同。比如说，我的那些猎人就有一种仪式。他
们每星期四都和村子里的姑娘们跳舞。于是，星期四就是一个美好的日子！我可
以一直散步到葡萄园去。如果猎人们什么时候都跳舞，天天又全都一样，那么我
也就没有假日了。”
就这样，小王子驯服了狐狸。当出发的时刻就快要来到时：
“啊！”狐狸说，“我一定会哭的。”
“这是你的过错，”小王子说，“我本来并不想给你任何痛苦，可你却要我驯
服你…”
“是这样的。”狐狸说。
“你可就要哭了！”小王子说。
“当然罗。”狐狸说。
“那么你什么好处也没得到。”
“由于麦子颜色的缘故，我还是得到了好处。”狐狸说。
然后，他又接着说。
“再去看看那些玫瑰花吧。你一定会明白，你的那朵是世界上独一无二的玫
瑰。你回来和我告别时，我再赠送给你一个秘密。”
于是小王子又去看那些玫瑰。
“你们一点也不象我的那朵玫瑰，你们还什么都不是呢！”小王子对她们说。
“没有人驯服过你们，你们也没有驯服过任何人。你们就象我的狐狸过去那样，
它那时只是和千万只别的狐狸一样的一只狐狸。但是，我现在已经把它当成了我
的朋友，于是它现在就是世界上独一无二的了。”
这时，那些玫瑰花显得十分难堪。
“你们很美，但你们是空虚的。”小王子仍然在对她们说，“没有人能为你
们去死。当然罗，我的那朵玫瑰花，一个普通的过路人以为她和你们一样。可是，
她单独一朵就比你们全体更重要，因为她是我浇灌的。因为她是我放在花罩中的。
因为她是我用屏风保护起来的。因为她身上的毛虫（除了留下两三只为了变蝴蝶
而外）是我除灭的。因为我倾听过她的怨艾和自诩，甚至有时我聆听着她的沉默。
因为她是我的玫瑰。”
他又回到了狐狸身边。
“再见了。”小王子说道。
“再见。”狐狸说。“喏，这就是我的秘密。很简单：只有用心才能看得清。
实质性的东西，用眼睛是看不见的。”
“实质性的东西，用眼睛是看不见的。”小王子重复着这句话，以便能把它
记在心间。
“正因为你为你的玫瑰花费了时间，这才使你的玫瑰变得如此重要。”
“正因为你为你的玫瑰花费了时间…”小王子又重复着，要使自己记住这些。
“人们已经忘记了这个道理，”狐狸说，“可是，你不应该忘记它。你现在
要对你驯服过的一切负责到底。你要对你的玫瑰负责…”
“我要对我的玫瑰负责…”小王子又重复着……
XXII
“你好。”小王子说道。
“你好。”扳道工说道。
“你在这里做什么？”小王子问。
“我一包包地分选旅客，按每千人一包。”扳道工说，“我打发这些运载旅客的列车，一会儿发往右方，一会儿发往左方。”
这时，一列灯火明亮的快车，雷鸣般地响着，把扳道房震得颤颤悠悠。
“他们真匆忙呀，”小王子说，“他们要寻找什么？”
“开机车的人自己也不知道。”扳道工说道。
于是，第二列灯火通明的快车又朝着相反的方向轰隆轰隆地开过去。
“他们怎么又回来了呢？”小王子问道。
“他们不是原来那些人了。”扳道工说，“这是一次对开列车。”
“他们不满意他们原来所住的地方吗？”
“人们是从来也不会满意自己所在的地方的。”扳道工说。
此时，第三趟灯火明亮的快车又隆隆而过。
“他们是在追随第一批旅客吗？”小王子问道。
“他们什么也不追随。”扳道工说，“他们在里面睡觉，或是在打哈欠。只
有孩子们把鼻子贴在玻璃窗上往外看。”
“只有孩子知道他们自己在寻找什么。”小王子说，“他们为一个布娃娃花
费不少时间，这个布娃娃就成了很重要的东西，如果有人夺走的他们的布娃娃，
他们就哭泣…”
“他们真幸运。”扳道工说。
XXIII
“你好。”小王子说。
“你好。”商人说道。
这是一位贩卖能够止渴的精制药丸的商人。每周吞服一丸就不会感觉口渴。
“你为什么卖这玩艺儿？”小王子说。
“这就大大地节约了时间。”商人说，“专家们计算过，这样，每周可以节
约五十三分钟。”
“那么，用这五十三分钟做什么用？”
“随便怎么用都行。…”
小王子自言自语地说：“我如果有五十三分钟可支配，我就悠哉游哉地向水
泉走去…”
XXIV
这是我在沙漠上出了事故的第八天。我听着有关这个商人的故事，喝完了我
所备用的最后一滴水。
“啊！”我对小王子说，“你回忆的这些故事真美。可是，我还没有修好我
的飞机。我没有喝的了，假如我能悠哉游哉地走到水泉边去，我一定也会很高兴
的！”
小王子对我说：“我的朋友狐狸…”
“我的小家伙，现在还说什么狐狸！”
“为什么？”
“因为这就要渴死人了。”
他不理解我的思路，他回答我道：
“即使快要死了，有过一个朋友也好么！我就为我有过一个狐狸朋友而感到
很高兴…”
“他不顾危险。”我自己思量着，“他从来不知道饥渴。只要有点阳光，他
就满足了…”
他看着我，答复着我的思想：
“我也渴了…我们去找一口井吧…”
我显出厌烦的样子：在茫茫的大沙漠上盲目地去找水井，真荒唐。然而我们
还是开始去寻找了。
当我们默默地走了好几个小时以后，天黑了下来，星星开始发出光亮。由于
渴我有点发烧，我看着这些星星，象是在做梦一样。小王子的话在我的脑海中跳
来跳去。
“你也渴吗？”我问他。
他却不回答我的问题，只是对我说：
“水对心也是有益处的…”
我不懂他的话是什么意思，可我也不做声…我知道不应该去问他。
他累了，他坐下来。我在他身旁坐下。沉默了一会，他又说道：
“星星是很美的，因为有一朵人们看不到的花…”
我回答道：“当然。”而我默默地看着月光下沙漠的褶皱。
“沙漠是美的。”他又说道。
确实如此。我一直很喜欢沙漠。坐在一个沙丘上，什么也看不见、听不见。
但是，却有一种说不出的东西在默默地放着光芒…
“使沙漠更加美丽的，就是在某个角落里，藏着一口井…”
我很惊讶，突然明白了为什么沙漠放着光芒。当我还是一个小孩子的时候，
我住在一座古老的房子里，而且传说，这个房子里埋藏着一个宝贝。当然，从来
没有任何人能发现这个宝贝，可能，甚至也没有人去寻找过。但是，这个宝贝使
整个房子着了魔似的。我家的房子在它的心灵深处隐藏着一个秘密…
我对小王子说道：“是的，无论是房子，星星，或是沙漠，使它们美丽的东
西是看不见的！”
“我真高兴，你和我的狐狸的看法一样。”小王子说。
小王子睡觉了，我就把他抱在怀里，又重新上路了。我很激动。就好象抱着
一个脆弱的宝贝。就好象在地球上没有比这更脆弱的了。我借着月光看着这惨白
的面额，这双紧闭的眼睛，这随风飘动的绺绺头发，这时我对自己说道：“我所
看到的仅仅是外表。最重要的是看不见的…”
由于看到他稍稍张开的嘴唇露出一丝微笑，我又自言自语地说：“在这个熟
睡了的小王子身上，使我非常感动的，是他对他那朵花的忠诚，是在他心中闪烁
的那朵玫瑰花的形象。这朵玫瑰花，即使在小王子睡着了的时候，也象一盏灯的
火焰一样在他身上闪耀着光辉…”这时，我就感觉到他更加脆弱。应该保护灯焰：
一阵风就可能把它吹灭…
于是，就这样走着，我在黎明时发现了水井。
XXV
“那些人们，他们往快车里拥挤，但是他们却不知道要寻找什么。于是，他
们就忙忙碌碌，来回转圈子…”小王子说道。
他接着又说：
“这没有必要…”
我们终于找到的这口井，不同于撒哈拉的那些井。撒哈拉的井只是沙漠中挖
的洞。这口井则很象村子中的井。可是，那里又没有任何村庄，我还以为是在做
梦呢。
“真怪，”我对小王子说：“一切都是现成的：辘轳、水桶、绳子…”
他笑了，拿着绳子，转动着辘轳。辘轳就象是一个长期没有风来吹动的旧风
标一样，吱吱作响。
“你听，”小王子说：“我们唤醒了这口井，它现在唱起歌来了…”我不愿
让他费劲。我对他说：
“让我来干吧。这活对你太重了。”
我慢慢地把水桶提到井栏上。我把它稳稳地放在那里。我的耳朵里还响着辘
轳的歌声。依然还在晃荡的水面上，我看见太阳的影子在跳动。
“我正需要喝这种水。”小王子说：“给我喝点…”
这时我才明白了他所要寻找的是什么！
我把水桶提到他的嘴边。他闭着眼睛喝水。就象节日一般舒适愉快。这水远
不只是一种饮料，它是披星戴月走了许多路才找到的，是在辘轳的歌声中，经过
我双臂的努力得来的。它象是一件礼品慰藉着心田。在我小的时候，圣诞树的灯
光，午夜的弥撒的音乐，甜蜜的微笑，这一切都使圣诞节时我收到的礼品辉映着
幸福的光彩。
“你这里的人在同一个花园中种植着五千朵玫瑰。”小王子说：“可是，他
们却不能从中找到自己所要寻找的东西…”
“他们是找不到的。”我回答道。
“然而，他们所寻找的东西却是可以从一朵玫瑰花或一点儿水中找到的…”
“一点不错。”我回答道。
小王子又加了一句：
“眼睛是什么也看不见的。应该用心去寻找。”
我喝了水。我痛快地呼吸着空气。沙漠在晨曦中泛出蜂蜜的光泽。这蜂蜜般
的光泽也使我感到幸福。为什么我要难过…
小王子又重新在我的身边坐下。他温柔地对我说：“你应该实践你的诺言。”
“什么诺言？”
“你知道…给我的小羊一个嘴套子…我要对我的花负责的呀！”
我从口袋中拿出我的画稿。小王子瞅见了，笑着说：
“你画的猴面包树，有点象白菜…”
“啊！”
我还为我画的猴面包树感到骄傲呢！
“你画的狐狸…它那双耳朵…有点象犄角…而且又太长了！”
这时，他又笑了。
“小家伙，你太不公正了。我过去只会画开着肚皮和闭着肚皮的巨蟒。”
“啊！这就行了。”他说：“孩子们认得出来。”
我就用铅笔勾画了一个嘴套。当我把它递给小王子时，我心里很难受：
“你的打算，我一点也不知道…”
但是，他不回答我，他对我说：
“你知道，我落在地球上…到明天就一周年了…”
接着，沉默了一会儿，他又说道：
“我就落在这附近…”
此时，他的面颊绯红。
我不知为什么，又感到一阵莫名其妙的心酸。这时，我产生了一个问题：
“一星期以前，我认识你的那天早上，你单独一个人在这旷无人烟的地方走
着；这么说，这并不是偶然的了？你是要回到你降落的地方去是吗！”
小王子的脸又红了。
我犹豫不定地又说了一句：
“可能是因为周年纪念吧？…”
小王子脸又红了。他从来也不回答这些问题，但是，脸红，就等于说“是的”，
是吧？
“啊！”我对他说：“我有点怕…”
但他却回答我说：
“你现在该工作了。你应该回到你的机器那里去。我在这里等你。你明天晚
上再来…”
但是，我放心不下。我想起了狐狸的话。如果被人驯服了，就可能会要哭的…
XXVI
在井旁边有一堵残缺的石墙。第二天晚上我工作回来的时候，我远远地看见
了小王子耷拉着双腿坐在墙上。我听见他在说话：
“你怎么不记得了呢？”他说，“绝不是在这儿。”
大概还有另一个声音在回答他，因为他答着腔说道：
“没错，没错，日子是对的；但地点不是这里…”
我继续朝墙走去。我还是看不到，也听不见任何别人。可是小王子又回答道：
“…那当然。你会在沙上看到我的脚印是从什么地方开始的。你在那里等着
我就行了。今天夜里我去那里。”
我离墙约有二十米远，可我依然什么也没有看见。
小王子沉默了一会又说：
“你的毒液管用吗？你保证不会使我长时间地痛苦吗？”
我焦虑地赶上前去，但我仍然不明白是怎么回事。
“现在你去吧，我要下来了！…”小王子说。
于是，我也朝墙脚下看去，我吓了一跳。就在那里，一条黄蛇直起身子冲着
小王子。这种黄蛇半分钟就能结果你的性命。我一面赶紧掏口袋，拔出手枪，一
面跑过去。可是一听到我的脚步声，蛇却象一股干涸了的水柱一样，慢慢钻进沙
里去。它不慌不忙地在石头的缝隙中钻动着，发出轻轻的金属般的响声。
我到达墙边的时候，正好把我的这位小王子接在我的怀抱中。他的脸色雪一
样惨白。
“这是搞的什么名堂！你怎么竟然和蛇也谈起心来了！”我解开了他一直带
着的金黄色的围脖。我用水渍湿了他的太阳穴，让他喝了点水。这时，我什么也
不敢再问他。他严肃地看着我，用双臂搂着我的脖子。我感到他的心就象一只被
枪弹击中而濒于死亡的鸟的心脏一样在跳动着。他对我说：
“我很高兴，你找到了你的机器所缺少的东西。你不久就可以回家去了…”
“你怎么知道的？”
我正是来告诉他，在没有任何希望的情况下，我成功地完成了修理工作。
他不回答我的问题，却接着说道：
“我也一样，今天，要回家去了…”
然后，他忧伤地说：
“我回家要远得多…要难得多…”
我清楚地感到发生了某种不寻常的事。我把他当作小孩一样紧紧抱在怀里，
可是我感觉到他径直地向着一个无底深渊沉陷下去，我想法拉住他，却怎么也办
不到…
他的眼神很严肃，望着遥远的地方。
“我有你画的羊，羊的箱子和羊的嘴套子…”
他带着忧伤的神情微笑了。
我等了很长时间，才觉得他身子渐渐暖和起来。
“小家伙，你受惊了…”
他害怕了，这是无疑的！他却温柔地笑着说：
“今天晚上，我会怕得更厉害…”
我再度意识到要发生一件不可弥补的事。我觉得我的心一下子就凉了。这时
我才明白：一想到再也不能听到这笑声，我就不能忍受。这笑声对我来说，就好
象是沙漠中的甘泉一样。
“小家伙，我还想听你笑…”
但他对我说：
“到今天夜里，正好是一年了。我的星球将正好处于我去年降落的那个地方
的上空…”
“小家伙，这蛇的事，约会的事，还有星星，这全是一场噩梦吧？”
但他并不回答我的问题。他对我说：
“重要的事，是看不见的…”
“当然…”
“这就象花一样。如果你爱上了一朵生长在一颗星星上的花，那么夜间，你
看着天空就感到甜蜜愉快。所有的星星上都好象开着花。”
“当然…”
“这也就象水一样，由于那辘轳和绳子的缘故，你给我喝的井水好象音乐一
样…你记得吗？…这水非常好喝…”
“当然…”
“夜晚，你抬头望着星星，我的那颗太小了，我无法给你指出我的那颗星星
是在哪里。这样倒更好。你可以认为我的那颗星星就在这些星星之中。那么，所
有的星星，你都会喜欢看的…这些星星都将成为你的朋友。而且，我还要给你一
件礼物…”
他又笑了。
“啊！小家伙，小家伙，我喜欢听你这笑声！”
“这正好是我给你的礼物，…这就好象水那样。”
“你说的是什么？”
“人们眼里的星星并不都一样。对旅行的人来说，星星是向导。对别的人来
说，星星只是些小亮光。对另外一些学者来说，星星就是他们探讨的学问。对我
所遇见的那个实业家来说，星星是金钱。但是，所有这些星星都不会说话。你呢，
你的那些星星将是任何人都不曾有过的…”
“你说的是什么？”
“夜晚，当你望着天空的时候，既然我就住在其中一颗星星上，既然我在其
中一颗星星上笑着，那么对你来说，就好象所有的星星都在笑，那么你将看到的
星星就是会笑的星星！”
这时，他又笑了。
“那么，在你得到了安慰之后（人们总是会自我安慰的）你就会因为认识了
我而感到高兴。你将永远是我的朋友。你就会想要同我一起笑。有时，你会为了
快乐而不知不觉地打开窗户。你的朋友们会奇怪地看着你笑着仰望天空。那时，
你就可以对他们说：‘是的，星星总是引我欢笑！’他们会以为你发疯了。我的
恶作剧将使你难堪…”
这时，他又笑了。
“这就好象我并没有给你星星，而是给你一大堆会笑出声来的小铃铛…”
他仍然笑着。随后他变得严肃起来：
“今天夜里…你知道…不要来了。”
“我不离开你。”
“我将会象是很痛苦的样子…我有点象要死去似的。就是这么回事，你就别
来看这些了，没有必要。”
“我不离开你。”
可是他担心起来。
“我对你说这些…这也是因为蛇的缘故。别让它咬了你…蛇是很坏的，它随
意咬人…”
“我不离开你。”
这时，他似乎有点放心了：
“对了，它咬第二口的时候就没有毒液了…”
这天夜里，我没有看到他起程。他不声不响地跑了。当我终于赶上他的时候，
他坚定地快步走着。他只是对我说道：
“啊，你在这儿…”
于是他拉着我的手。但是他仍然很担心：
“你不该这样。你会难受的。我会象是死去的样子，但这不会是真的…”
我默默无言。
“你明白，路很远。我不能带着这付身躯走。它太重了。”
我依然沉默不语。
“但是，这就好象剥落的旧树皮一样。旧树皮，并没有什么可悲的。”
我还是沉默不语。
他有些泄气了。但是他又振作起来：
“这将是蛮好的，你知道。我也一定会看星星的。所有的星星都将是带有生
了锈的辘轳的井。所有的星星都会倒水给我喝…”
我还是沉默不语。
“这将是多么好玩啊！你将有五亿个铃铛，我将有五亿口水井…”
这时，他也沉默了，因为他在哭。
“就是这儿。让我自个儿走一步吧。”
他这时坐下来，因为他害怕了。他却仍然说道：
“你知道…我的花…我是要对她负责的！而她又是那么弱小！她又是那么天
真。她只有四根微不足道的刺，保护自己，抵抗外敌…”
我也坐了下来，因为我再也站立不住了。他说道：
“就是这些…全都说啦…”
他犹豫了一下，然后站起来。他迈出了一步。而我却动弹不得。
在他的脚踝子骨附近，一道黄光闪了一下。刹那间他一动也不动了。他没有
叫喊。他轻轻地象一棵树一样倒在地上，大概由于沙地的缘故，连一点响声都没
有。
XXVII
到现在，一点不错，已经有六年了…我还从未讲过这个故事。同伴们重新见
到了我，都为能看见我活着回来而高兴。我却很悲伤。我告诉他们：“这是因为
疲劳的缘故…”
现在，我稍微得到了些安慰。就是说…还没有完全平静下来。可我知道他已
经回到了他的星球上。因为那天黎明，我没有再见到他的身躯。他的身躯并不那
么重…从此，我就喜欢在夜间倾听着星星，好象是倾听着五亿个铃铛…
可是，现在却又发生了不寻常的事。我给小王子画的羊嘴套上，忘了画皮带！
他再也不可能把它套在羊嘴上。于是，我思忖着：“他的星球上发生了什么事呢？
大概小羊把花吃掉了吧…”
有时我又对自己说，“绝对不会的！小王子每天夜里都用玻璃罩子罩住他的
花，而且他会把羊看管好的…”想到这里，我就非常高兴。这时，所有的星星都
在柔情地轻声笑着。
忽而我又对自己说：“人们有时总免不了会疏忽的，那就够戗！某一天晚上
他忘了玻璃罩子，或者小羊夜里不声不响地跑出来…”想到这里，小铃铛都变成
泪珠了！
这真是一个很大的奥秘。对你们这些喜欢小王子的人来说，就象对于我来说
一样，无论什么地方，凡是某处，如果一只羊（尽管我们并不认识它），吃了一
朵玫瑰花，或是没有吃掉一朵玫瑰花，那么宇宙的面貌就全然不同。
你们望着天空。你们想一想：羊究竟是吃了还是没有吃掉花？那么你们就会
看到一切都变了样…
任何一个大人将永远不会明白这个问题竟如此重要！
对我来说，这是世界上最美也是最凄凉的地方。它与前一页画的是同一个地
方。我再一次将它画出来，为的是好让你们看清楚。就是在这里，小王子出现在
地球上，后来，也正是在这里消失了的。请你们仔细看看这个地方，以便你们有
一天去非洲沙漠上旅行的时候，能够准确地辨认出这个地方。如果，你们有机会
经过这个地方，我请求你们不要匆匆而过，请你们就在那颗星星底下等一等！如
果这时，有个小孩子向你走来，如果他笑着，他有金黄色的头发，如果当你问他
问题时他不回答，你一定会猜得出他是谁。那就请你们帮个忙，不要让我这么忧
伤：赶快写信告诉我，他又回来了…
「全文完」
?***后记***
关于《小王子》的作者
圣·德克旭贝里（AntoinedeSaiot-Exupery），1900年出生于法国里昂，
1921-1923年在法国空军中服役，曾是后备飞行员，后来又成为民用航空驾驶员，
参加了开辟法国——非洲——南美国际航线的工作，其间他还从事文学写作，
作品有《南线班机》（1930），《夜航》（1931）等等。
1939年德国法西斯入侵法国，鉴于圣·德克旭贝里曾多次受伤，医生认为他
不能再入伍参战；但经他坚决要求，参加了抗德战争，被编入2/33空军侦察大
队。1940年法国在战争中溃败，他所在的部队损失惨重，该部被调往阿尔及尔，
随后即被复员，他只身流亡美国。在美国期间，他继续从事写作，1940年发表了
《战斗飞行员》，1943年发表了《给一个人质的信》以及《小王子》。
1943年，在他的强烈要求下，他回到法国在北非的抗战基地阿尔及尔。他的
上级考虑到他的身体和年龄状况，只同意他执行五次飞行任务，他却要求到八次，
1944年7月31日上午，他出航执行第八次任务，从此再也没有回来，牺牲时，年
仅44岁。
『PS.我在1993年的一份参考消息上看到一则简讯，在欧洲某地的一个
湖中，发现了圣·德克旭贝里的飞机残骸。这次搜索是经过对他最后一次出航的
线路和德军当时的空军记录研究以后进行的，经过认证确认是那架失踪了半个世
纪的侦察机。为了纪念这位伟大的战士和文学家，当地决定为这架飞机的残骸建
立一个博物馆，以他的名字命名，陈列他的作品和遗物。原文我曾经剪下来保存，
但是目前不在身边，上面是凭记忆写的。如有出入，请多包涵。Loking注。』
SAINT-EXUPERY
Antoinede(1900-44).Anadventurouspilotandalyrical
poet
AntoinedeSaint-Exuperyconveyedinhisbooksthesolitudeandmystic
grandeuroftheearlydaysofflight.Hedescribeddangerousadventuresinthe
skiesandalsowrotethewhimsicalchildren'sfable'TheLittlePrince'.
Antoine-Marie-RogerdeSaint-ExuperywasbornonJune29
1900
inLyon
France.
Inthe1920shehelpedestablishairmailroutesoverseas.DuringWorldWarIIhe
flewasamilitaryreconnaissancepilot.AftertheGermansoccupiedFrancein1940
heescapedtotheUnitedStates.HerejoinedtheairforceinNorthAfricain1943.
DuringwhatwastohavebeenhisfinalreconnaissancemissionovertheMediterranean
Sea
hediedwhenhisplanewasshotdownonJuly31
1944.
Saint-Exupery'sfirstbook
'SouthernMail'
wasaboutthelifeanddeathofan
airmailpilot.ItwaspublishedinFrenchin1929.Otherbooksinclude'Night
Flight'(1931)
aboutthefirstairlinepilots
and'Wind
Sand
andStars'(1939)
inwhichhedescribeshisfeelingsduringflightsoverthedesert.
'TheLittlePrince'(1943)
whichinawayisreallyachildren'sbookfor
grown-ups
waswrittenduringSaint-Exupery'sstayintheUnitedStates.
Agentleandthoughtfulbook
ittellsthestoryofaboywholivesaloneona
tinyplanet.
Afinalvolumeofreflections
whichprovidesaninsightintotheauthor'sviews
onthemeaningoflife
is'TheWisdomoftheSands'(1948).Thisbookwaspublished
afterthepilot'sdeath.
--FromCompton'sInteractiveEncyclopedia

